Thomas: 0:00
Tech professionals,
they're trying to figure out how do I apply AI,
and one of the muscles they have to build is,
how do you evaluate this plethora of tools
that have come out of the woodwork? And just
talking to different folks, that
is, again, a skill that you have
to mature so you can kind of poke through
and say, okay, that tool looks really cool,
but it's not going to scale for us, not going
to be practical. This tool over here, much more
practical. So that's still early days, but it
is pretty amazing how rapidly it's maturing.
Craig: 0:27
Hi, I'm Craig Smith,
and this is Eye on AI. In this episode,
I speak with Thomas Lah, the Executive
Director for the Technology and Services Industry
Association, TSIA. While you assume tech companies
offering AI-powered products are way ahead of
everybody else in using AI in their operations,
it turns out they're having as much trouble
as non-tech companies. Thomas delves into how
AI is transforming internal processes such
as content development, support services,
and field services, and discusses the challenges
and opportunities tech companies face in
integrating AI into their workloads. I hope you
find the conversation as informative as I did.
Craig: 1:19
AI might be the
most important new computer technology ever.
It's storming every industry, and literally
billions of dollars are being invested. So,
buckle up. The problem is that AI needs a
lot of speed and processing power. So how do you
compete without costs spiraling out of control?
It's time to upgrade to the next generation
of the cloud, Oracle Cloud Infrastructure,
or OCI. OCI is a single platform for your
infrastructure, database, application development,
and AI needs. OCI has four to eight times the
bandwidth of other clouds, offers one consistent
price instead of variable regional pricing, and
of course, nobody does data better than Oracle.
So now you can train your AI models at twice the
speed and less than half the cost of other clouds.
If you want to do more and spend less, like
Uber, 8x8, and Databricks Mosaic, take a free
test drive of OCI at oracle.com/eyeonai.
That's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I, all run together.
Craig: 2:31
So, Thomas, go ahead. Can you introduce yourself?
Thomas: 2:34
Yeah, absolutely. So,
I am Thomas Lah. I serve as the executive
director for the Technology and Services
Industry Association. We are a for-profit
research institute. We've been around almost
20 years. We focus on technology business
models. We get companies basically under NDA,
and we do a lot of benchmarking and
research on their operating models.
Craig: 2:53
Yeah, and you're talking
about companies that are using technology or
companies that are providing tech infrastructure?
Thomas: 3:01
Companies that are providing basically
enterprise technology. So, if you think about a
Microsoft, if you think about a Cisco, a Dell,
all those companies are members, Salesforce.
And what's also interesting in that is more
of older companies, think of somebody like a John
Deere, as they start to get into AI and software,
Rockwell Automation, Siemens, all those companies
now are members of TSIA. And again, our lens is,
if you're providing hardware or software,
what is the operating model around that?
How you monetize, selling product versus
services, all that kind of fun stuff.
Craig: 3:38
Yeah. And so, do you guys
operate as kind of a consulting company or just
as a place to exchange information among members?
Thomas: 3:47
Yeah, it's a great question. So,
our model is to do operational
research, play that, you know,
those insights back to members to help them
implement the best practices, optimize their
performance metrics. We do light advisory work.
We very deliberately do not get into, you know,
big, heavy consulting. That's not our model.
We want to have a one-to-many, get people to
answers as quickly as possible, and quite frankly,
avoid some of the exploratory consulting you have
to do to get to a right answer. We're like,
hey, we already know the right answer. We've,
you know, we've talked to tons of companies
on this. Here's what you should be pursuing.
Craig: 4:21
Yeah,
and what's your background?
How long have you been at TSIA?
Thomas: 4:27
Yeah, yeah. So,
I was at Silicon Valley, a company called
Silicon Graphics, where I worked for about
eight years within their service organization.
So, I really kind of learned directly what it
meant to build services when you're also
providing, you know, technology and the
good and the bad and the ugly of that. And that
inspired me to write a book. And since then, I've
written seven books on technology business models
and have been doing research on it ever since.
Craig: 4:52
Yeah, and a lot
of tech companies are both builders and service
providers these days. I mean, as a matter of fact,
I'm not sure if I can think of one that
is not. Is that an accurate perception?
Thomas: 5:07
Yeah, I mean, the big transformation
that has occurred with enterprise technology
companies over the last decade or so, and,
you know, you can pick on a Cisco, you can pick
on a Microsoft. These companies, their preferred
model is to create great technology, whether
it's a piece of hardware, a piece of software;
launch it into the world, have, you know,
partners worried about implementing it and helping
customers, you know, optimize it, et cetera. They
want to focus on creating the core technology.
What's happened over the years is, especially
when you're dealing with complex enterprises,
is that these customers want to make sure they're
really adopting and getting the business value
from the technology. So, the services component
has become important in terms of really making
sure that customers can adopt, get the value
realization. So, all those companies have support
services. They have education services. They have
some level of consulting. They have work that
they do to enable partners. So, it's definitely
more of a blended model than it has ever been.
Craig: 6:09
Yeah, and I would guess that AI and generative AI
in particular is sort of like a bull in the China
shop of TSIA because literally every tech company,
every technology services company is trying to
rewrite their product from an GenAI perspective.
Thomas: 6:30
Well, there's sort of two
lenses on this when you think about AI within
the tech industry. So, one lens is if, again,
if I'm at Microsoft, if I'm a ServiceNow, if I'm
a Salesforce, they all want to basically have AI
capabilities that they're implementing into their
products and promoting out into the world, right,
and placing their bets there. And so that's one
thing that everybody's, you know, working to do
and scrambling to do. We're actually focused on
the other lens, which is, how is AI changing the
way they are operating internally? Everything from
how they develop the products to okay, now we're
going to, you know, service the products, educate
customers— all those workflows, how are they
being impacted right now, by the potential of AI?
Because, you know, we think there, we don't think,
we know there's a massive there there already.
And you use the term “bull in the China shop”,
it's exactly what's going on. Everyone's like,
whoa, this is really, you know, a game changer.
And so that's what we are really laser focused
on; is helping people understand where the most
compelling use cases are, separate the hype
from the reality, all that kind of fun stuff
is this really, becomes something that is going
to just be ubiquitous within operating models.
Craig: 7:48
And it's going, it's going
to get even more disruptive or confusing. I've
been talking to people about agents, you know,
AI agents, AI models that can take actions in,
even in the physical world, I would guess that
all tech companies are crawling through their
operations to see where that can be applied.
Craig: 8:14
So, your members
are focused on getting their technology into
the hands of enterprise and having enterprise
adopt their technology. But at the same time,
there's this foundational technology that's
appearing and your members have to figure
out how to integrate that into their own
operations. And how do you go about advising
on that? Or how are people thinking about that?
Thomas: 8:49
Yeah, so, this is the way that
we've approached this for our member companies.
So, you know, I'm sure you're familiar with the
AI framework, talks about AI capabilities
that are below the water line, you know,
they've become very common at the waterline
versus they're way up on the mountain still,
right. And so, I think one of the first things
that people are struggling with, leadership teams,
is, you know, understanding that landscape, what
is really mature? What are the use cases that are
right here, versus stuff that really is futures.
And so, we tracked that— we continue to track,
we did our first cut last year. And we think
about AI capabilities below the waterline
all the way up to way above, across seven
different areas, areas like customer success,
areas like support, are people using support
agents, areas like education services, etc. So,
we take snapshots for the members. And it was
amazing, the first snapshot we did last year,
we identified, the research team identified over
70 use cases, they were already out there, right,
across these areas. And then what we've been doing
is just clicking into those use cases in more
detail to understand, you know, what's working and
what's not. And so, I'll just give you some very
practical real-world examples, right, we've been
identifying with the past couple of months. So,
this concept of copilots, right, so Microsoft
has a copilot. Well, the real there there for
enterprise cases is where people, you know,
enterprises make that unique to them. So, Nokia
has a copilot targeted at telecom engineers. So,
it's very specific to their language, helps with
support. Dell has the same thing for support. Open
Text is a member that's done just incredible work
on leveraging AI to generate educational service
content. And one of the biggest issues these tech
companies have is, you know, technology can be
complex, members don't adopt all the features,
right? There's, there's too much. And so, if you
can do a much better job of building education
materials that are, you know, more persona
driven, more customized, local language, all
that fun stuff. So that's another example. So, we
we are just finding use case after use case that
there is real ROI there, real impact already and
so that's, you know, what we're super focused on.
Craig: 11:16
Yeah, and you mentioned copilot,
I would guess that there's no bias within TSIA
toward one company's tech or another but there
is CodeWhisperer and some others. How do
you— do you do you make an effort to talk
generically about these things or do some tools
become so dominant that you're you're talking—
Thomas: 11:51
Yeah, yeah, and we are we're, because we
have pretty much all the the tool providers on the
platform, we're agnostic. What we do for members
when we're doing these case studies is, we will
ask them, you know, what tools, AI tools are you
leveraging? Is it off the shelf, are you taking
something open source and modifying? And then we
will play that back to folks so they can start
to see the pattern recognition. And it's still,
it's interesting, it's still, early days. A lot
of the tools are immature. I think one of the
interesting things we're finding for, you know,
enterprise companies, for tech professionals,
they're trying to figure out how do I apply AI.
And one of the muscles they have to build is,
how do you evaluate this plethora of tools
that have come out of the woodwork? And just
talking to different folks, that is, again a
skill that you have to mature so you can kind
of poke through and say, okay that tool looks
really cool but it's not going to scale for us,
not going to be practical, this tool over here,
much more practical. So that's still early,
early days but it is pretty amazing how rapidly
it's maturing, and I'll just pick on this area
of education services. This case study, I was
talking to the woman that runs education services
at OpenText and then they started this journey
of how they're going to leverage AI for content
development. It was probably about, I don't know,
a year and a half, two years ago she said they
started. And they were literally, like, just
beta testing a tool with their Canadian base,
with a Canadian-based company and really almost
like co-developing the capabilities of that tool
with them. Today, she said, you know, what we
were doing with them co-developing two years ago,
that is now just all off-the-shelf capability
that another education service, you know,
organization can just onboard immediately and take
off running. So, it is maturing rapidly for sure.
Craig: 13:44
Yeah, and that's kind of a cautionary
tale. I mean, I talk to not necessarily tech
enterprises, but enterprises about developing,
about adopting AI and you know it's C-suite
executives are kind of a deer in the headlights
because there's, in any category there are a dozen
offerings and you don't want to invest in training
up people and buying the tech and everything and
find out that you bet on the losing horse. So,
a lot of people are waiting. Is the same thing
happening in the tech services industry?
Thomas: 14:22
Well, I think there's
a couple different flavors of this, right? So, if
you're a company that has your own AI capability
that you're already investing in heavily, if
you pick a Microsoft, you pick a ServiceNow,
then those organizations are aggressively
applying that for internal use cases. Right,
they don't have to blink. They know that they're
committed to that and they're getting the benefits
that they can. So, I think that's one use case.
I think the other use cases are some of the tools
that are already proving to be mature. They're out
there and so I think people can jump on those. And
there's a third use case, which is you're right,
there's still, maybe that particular area of AI
is still maturing.
Thomas: 15:02
My cautionary tale, though, to these executive
teams, because I agree with what you're saying.
I think when you go in and you speak to, you know,
the more senior, the bigger this gap is. I mean,
these people have really zero experience with AI
because it is new, right. So, think about being
an executive your whole life. You know, you're
building a business, you know it works, and this
whole new thing comes along and you're trying to
figure out okay, what does that really mean to my
company? And I have no experience and I’m looking
left and right and no of us have any experience.
So, the common reaction I’m seeing is this sort of
mañana strategy- let me just take a deep breath,
you know, let’s wait until everybody else figures
out the tools and then we'll kind of jump on it.
And I understand and appreciate the caution.
Thomas: 15:52
But my greater concern is I don't think that these
executive teams are internalizing how massively
disruptive this is going to be to their operating
models. And my concern is if they're not starting
to lean in now and saying, hey, we got to start
understanding some of the use cases, we've got to
start piloting some of the more proven use cases,
we've got to start getting basically experience
with what it means to use AI and change. If we're
not doing any of that right now, every month,
every quarter that goes by, there's a bigger gap
between your operating costs and somebody who's
figured this out. And again, I think it's going
to move fast. And so, pick a horizon. In two,
three years you could wake up and say my
cost structure is 20, 30, 40% higher than
my competitors because I had this wait and see
mentality and I think there's a real risk there.
Craig: 16:48
Yeah, although there's also
kind of an art to timing. I mean that example
you gave of the education company spending—
Thomas: 16:57
A year and a half, two years,
yeah, working on it, yeah.
Craig: 16:59
There's a big cost associated with that and if by
the time you're through those two years, you've
committed to this technology, suddenly there are
all these other off-the-shelf solutions. Your
competitors can pick up and be right where you
are without having invested that time and money.
Thomas: 17:16
Well, and I think, but if you think about, so,
let's think about the components of implementing
an AI solution, right? So, one of them is clearly
just, what am I going to spend on a core piece of
software or technology? The other components are
understanding, you know, how my professionals,
how my employees are going to work differently,
and there's a curve on that, right? So, let's
keep just stay on this education thread.
Thomas: 17:42
So, one of the big advantages
of AI and education is around content development
and how you can use AI. So if you're, let's say,
you, have a team of content developers who are
professionals, have been doing this for a while,
they're very good at it, but they have a certain
way of developing content that they've been doing
for years and years and years, and you don't just
snap your fingers and say, well, here's this new
tool and voila, you've changed your workflow
and you're proficient- there's a curve there,
right? So, again, my nervousness is if you're
not building any experience with what it means
to integrate AI into your workflows and you're
waiting, waiting, waiting to place the safest
bet possible on the technology; there's still a
gap there which I think is a little concerning.
Craig: 18:30
Yeah, you would assume that technology services
companies are quicker on the uptake than not.
Thomas: 18:39
I spent a lot of time briefing these executive
teams on the state of technology business models,
right. What's driving profitability, where we
see headwinds, what are-. And in every one of
these briefings for the past 12 months, I
put this topic of AI on the table. Right,
and we do a lot of survey work in this. So, you
ask questions like, do you have a senior executive
assigned to AI, your AI strategy? Do you have a
clear budget? Do you have processes to share best
practices of implementing AI across departments?
So, you can test on these types of practices.
Thomas: 19:11
And you know tech, I think, has
the same challenges that almost any industry does
on this right now. Again, it's such a new thing.
They're not sure how to organize around it, they
have data problems like everybody has internally.
Just because they’re tech doesn't mean that
their data is clean, and so there's sort of this
paradox. When you read something in the business
press, if you look at the industries that are
always shown to be the most aggressive with AI,
it's technology companies and, I think, financial
services comes up pretty high there and then you
go from there, right. So, they're probably doing
a better job than a lot of industries. But I think
there's this misnomer that just because they're,
you know, you’re tech company, that you're just
you're totally on this thing and you got it. I
am not seeing that. I think that there's a lot of
executive teams that are still just as flat-footed
as any retail executive or other industry.
Craig: 20:09
Yeah, and what percentage of just off the cuff,
not a hard data point, but what percentage would
you say of your membership are, if not AI native,
have been in the AI space for 10 years or so.
Thomas: 20:29
Yeah, that's a fantastic question.
Here's the lens we use on that, so, we think of
a spectrum of tech companies right now that goes
from being what we call AI advantaged, and so,
what are the attributes there? They probably have
AI products they're monetizing, they're using
AI internally, so they're pretty savvy. And the
opposite end of that spectrum is what we call
severe AI laggers. They have no AI offerings,
they're not using AI internally, they're not well
positioned to leverage it because they don't have
good data, et cetera, et cetera.
Thomas: 21:03
So, here's this spectrum and right now it's
sort of almost like this classic bell curve
of life. You have about 10 to 14% of the tech
companies we look at that really, I would say
are AI advantaged, but on the opposite end you
have 10, 15% that are severely disadvantaged, and
then you have the folks in the middle. So, it is
almost like this classic bell curve of life. But
again, I think my observation, looking at these
companies operate, these AI-advantaged companies,
to me this is like the internet on steroids.
When the internet came out, and companies that
were able to jump on that fast created some real
advantage. This AI thing is going to move faster
than that and the advantages that get created are
even going to be more massive. So, if you're down
here and you again are severely disadvantaged, not
well positioned to really even leverage AI in your
operating model, that is going to be a problem.
Craig: 21:59
You were talking about the different, looking at
the different places in the operations where AI
could be applied to immediate ROI, do you have a
distribution there that, you should start with-?
Thomas: 22:16
I'll give you two responses to that and
what we see in the data. So, one response is if
we just think about different activities within a
tech company, where are the folks that are leaning
in? Where we see the use cases that are mature and
you could, definitely should be leveraging right
now, the classic is support services. Everything
from, you're talking about agents, but just
helping with self-support all the way to more
predictive support. I mean, basically they're
using AI to prevent things from even happening,
right, outages, et cetera. So that is becoming
very mature. I would say that field services,
using AI so you don't have to deploy hardware
and equipment onsite, that's a big use case,
education services, as I mentioned, for content
development. That's a big use case. And then you
start to see a fall off. So, if you look at the
area of customer success, which is very popular,
how to help customers adopt, customer success
organizations are kind of lagging on applying
AI. There's good use cases, they're just lagging.
And then, when you come to the revenue generation
side, so if you think about any technology
company, you have to sell and market your
products and there are absolutely use cases
for AI to help you do that more effectively
and what we're seeing is sales and marketing
organizations are severe laggers right now in
using AI. And again, there are some that are. But
I'm just saying in general, right, you say, hey,
how are you using AI to do renewal management,
or your forecasting, or to better understand
opportunities? Still, sales organizations are
typically not technology forward organizations.
Thomas: 23:55
But I will tell you,
the other view on this, like, where are the use
cases? I think that the companies that get an ROI,
proven ROI, you focus on workflows, actually, that
you understand really well that you have really
solid performance metrics on, again, content
development. An education service organization
can tell you, hey, to generate an hour of
training materials, it takes make up a number,
10 hours of labor. If I apply AI to that, I
can see exactly where I'm reducing. Same with,
how much time does a support engineer spend on
a call? How many times do I deploy equipment,
replacement hardware that I didn't need to? Those
are all clear performance KPIs where you can put
AI to it, and you can see the benefits.
Thomas: 24:42
That's a winning attribute as opposed to, and it's
interesting there's just an article in the Wall
Street Journal. It was about Microsoft's co-pilot,
and they were saying, well, we're paying whatever,
$30 a month, we're not sure if there's benefit
and we've got to— but I read that and I'm like,
well, but what's the use case? I mean just giving
employees co-pilot and throwing it out there and
paying for it and then going, well, I don't know
if there's an ROI— because you haven't defined
what you expect to get out of that. So, that's
where you really do see ROI is when people are
crystal clear on what they're trying to optimize.
Craig: 25:14
Yeah, you mentioned a few times now the education
content generation. Are you talking about
companies that are creating training programs
for other companies, or are you talking about?
Thomas: 25:31
Their own, yea, their
internal. So if you think about this challenge,
there's something we wrote about years ago and
we called it the Consumption Gap, and it was a
book called Complexity Avalanche and our argument
was that enterprise tech companies just keep
throwing out all of this feature functionality,
wave after wave, and the gap between what
enterprise customers, enterprise customers can
actually consume and apply, it just gets bigger
and bigger. So that's always a challenge for the
education, internal education folks, is getting
the materials. What's effective education? Again,
is it targeted toward different user types and
personas? And so, using AI to create personalized
content at scale is amazing, and I know you
had the Khan Academy founder on talking—
Thomas: 26:21
It’s that thought right,
is, how does AI really change and make it easier
for people to consume? And I'll give you just
simple examples. The biggest challenge with these
education service departments is keeping their
content up to date with new releases. So, if it
takes me all these man hours to do this every
time, I'm always falling behind. If I can use
AI to compress that and get fresh releases out
there in a super timely manner, it's a game
changer for them. So, its just one example,
it speaks to not only saving real cost but
creating a better customer experience as well.
Craig: 27:02
Yeah, and do you guys,
as an organization provide training, any kind
of training? I mean, it seems like that would be
a perfect use case where you say, look, you have
this tool, Copilot, you have a, depending on your,
but these are tech companies, you have all
these developers. How do you get it applied?
Thomas: 27:24
So, our use case on this and it's a
great question. So, if you think about a company
that creates research, right, so we go out, we
study things and what you typically do you create
papers on that; research artifacts that people can
consume, and then we will also, we will workshop
around that. So, if somebody goes well, hey,
I read the paper, but I want my team to really
get this framework or really understand these
lessons learned, can you have somebody deliver?
It's like a stand and deliver. So those are our
two traditional ways to basically impart our
insights on the audience. There's no doubt that
AI is going to allow us to just take that content
engine and again put it on steroids and create
way more nuanced versions of it. So you come in,
Craig, and understanding your background and what
your role is at the company, et cetera, we can now
put our content in formats to spoon feed you meet
you where you're at, instead of saying here's the
one paper we wrote for a bunch of people on this
topic. So that's the journey we're on right now.
Thomas: 28:23
The other really cool thing about this in terms
of imparting knowledge is still, even for us,
we write papers which are, you know, in a sense,
very structured content, but we have tons of
unstructured content from from webinars, from,
you know, powerpoint presentations, from you know,
notes from our research researchers. We, you
know, from interactions with our members,
which you can start to bring in and
feed to create structured experiences.
Thomas: 28:53
We actually just released a
new digital platform for our members which starts
with what we call AI-enabled search so much more
than traditional search being able to serve up
the right content, again for where you are. And
then we're on the journey of now, how do we take
it, how do we ingest all this unstructured content
and start to put it out in different ways? So, if
you do research and advisory or consulting and you
think you're going to do a traditional brain on
a stick model five years from now, you're kidding
yourself. And it's amazing because again, this
thing is moving so fast. Look at what's happening
to the traditional consulting firms, like the
McKinsey's of the world. They're already reshaping
their workforce. They're already downsizing
because this brain on a stick; I just get a bunch
of smart people to come out and just brute force
you through these learnings or whatever. That's
not going to be the winning model.
Craig: 29:47
Well, let me ask the obvious question. How much AI
do you guys use in your operation? Do you struggle
with the same thing?
Thomas: 29:55
Yeah, well, I always say we are a mirror or
reflection of our members. We look, you know,
like the challenges they have with AI, the
challenges we have. You got to pick the right
tools. You're comment about maturity, we've
been working with a lot of, we do writing,
so one of the first applications that we've
leaned into is how you can leverage AI to
make your researchers more productive, and those
tools have been fluid and we've settled on some
tools right now, literally within the past month.
So, we're on the same journey everybody else is,
but I'll give you some examples here.
Thomas: 30:31
Again, we are very committed and internalized
the fact that AI is going to change our operating
model and every employee in the company whether
you're a customer success manager, we have those,
whether you're a researcher, whether you're a
salesperson, whether you're a marketing person,
that you just have got to lean into that reality
and we're going to figure out as fast as we can
Thomas: 30:52
what that means. And so, we have, you
know, in general we call it an AI task force, and
it's made up of people from different departments
and they are meeting constantly to be checking
this landscape out. What are the tools out
there? What do we think the top use cases are for
the company? Prioritize that and then just keep
chipping at those, and that doesn't sound overly
complex, but I can tell you that is several steps
ahead of many tech companies out there, right?
They haven't had that internalization that this is
gonna change everybody's workflow. So, what does
that mean to how we operate? They're still, again,
not sure. Let's wait for the tools, and so I think
again, our guidance to the members is you just,
you have to get serious about this now and get
experience and insights now and it will mature.
But as it matures, you're going to be ready to
go, as opposed to, you know, trying to just jump
on down the road.
Craig: 31:51
Yeah, and this task force this is something that,
as a journalist, you know, I don’t quite know how
to handle. Do you have some researchers on the
staff of that task force that are literally,
that trial every model or every product in a
category and write an assessment of it, or?
Thomas: 32:17
Yeah, you know, it is a team sport,
and this is what I'm observing. Again, we're we're
learning like everybody else. It's not like we,
you know, two years ago, can say that, okay,
you know, we're really adapted AI and we know
all the tools and we know all the use cases. We
are learning every week. But if you look at the
way we're approaching it and I think this is a
good practice for companies, is cross-functional.
You got to get people who are practitioners
in your different areas to come and say gosh,
what do I, I need to understand what again, what
AI could mean to me, to my customer success peers,
what it could mean to my sales peers, what it
could mean to our researchers. So, you need
representation, number one; from different
departments that would actually be users.
Thomas: 32:57
You can't just go off in
an ivory tower and have people technically say
this is really cool and throw it over, but you
have to have the right technical talent in play.
So, we obviously have IT people that are on that,
and we are blessed. We have a killer, what
we call our A team, which is an analytics,
data and software team, and they are the technical
experts on, you're talking about, what are some of
the tools? What do we see as strengths and
weaknesses? Because if you don't have that
technical muscle and you just have practitioners
who use, they don't know the right questions to
ask on that side. So, you got to bring them
together and so I think one of the struggles
out there for sure for companies is they don't yet
have that technical muscle when it comes to AI.
Thomas: 33:43
You have strong IT people,
you can have strong product people, but they may
not have real expertise yet in AI, and that's what
companies have got to ramp up. I think it's one
of those things where, because obviously there's
a lot of consulting firms that can help with that
and they can augment your internal staff but I
would not outsource that completely in sense to
say look, I'll just let consulting firm A come in
and tell me what the answers are technically.
I think, just like with your IT departments,
no matter if you have a lot of partners involved
with your IT, you still have to have some level of
internal expertise to help guide you there.
Craig: 34:19
Yeah, do you have a sense, as you're going
through this or watching other people go
through this and I know that the answer will be
variable depending on what part of the operations
or what thing you're trying to automate but how
long does that process take? Because the market
is moving so fast. So, you have a task force. On
that task force is a head of sales and you know,
it surprised me what you said about sales being
laggards, because two or three years ago now,
I had on the podcast a company called
Akkio. And they have a no-code platform,
and their biggest use case is ranking leads
because the sales team can't call every lead. So,
they have this predictive model.
Craig: 35:13
It's a pretty standard model, frankly, but you
drop in all your sales lead data from you know
before and the outcomes that you got off of those,
and then the model figures out whatever patterns
there are in the data that makes somebody a lead
worthy spending time on. And then when you get a
batch of leads in, you run them through the model.
It ranks them and you know who to focus on. So,
the sales guy is there and says, yeah, we need
to automate this. There are a dozen probably much
more than that tools out there or companies that
offer that kind of a product. Someone's got to go
through all of those tools and figure out features
and cost and whatnot. On something like that,
is that assuming you have buy-in, you're not
fighting political battles? Is that a six-month
process? Is that a three-week process?
Thomas: 36:14
Yeah, this is a great question and I want to
click into the sales conversation directly to
kind of put some light on that, so you understand
why we're seeing that. But let's just talk first
of all the general case. So, your department,
whether you're in sales, or your education,
support, whatever and you're going to go
through this journey where you say, hey,
we want to leverage AI more effectively and
in these case studies where I am interviewing
companies around successful deployment,
right, they went through this journey.
Thomas: 36:47
One of the things we ask is how long did this
take, when you started to explore tools to get to
the place? And right now, the common answer is two
to three years. Two to three years, okay, but that
is going to start doing this [shorten], okay. Now,
when you click into that and you start saying,
oh, wow, gosh, two to three years, yeah,
we had to start chipping on this a while ago. What
creates that type of timeline? Well, first of all,
when you were on this earlier, the tools were
more immature two, three years ago. So, the lot
around just, can I get the tools in beta? Can I
get them to work? That's going to compress, okay,
so that one's definitely going to get shorter. My
next problem, my data. My data is a mess. AI is a
data-driven engine here, and so a lot of time you
have to get through getting your data in order.
Okay, so that, I think, is also going to get
easier. I think there's going to be tools there
that will help people, so that will compress over
time. The next click over, though and again this
is one where people underestimate is, maybe now
I have a great tool, I've got my data in order,
I now can apply this to the workflow; but I am
underestimating the change management with my
employees, and that can end up creating oh gosh,
this was not like two weeks and they were adept.
I had to get some early adopters. I had to learn
what was working, what wasn't working. I had to
go back. So, again, and I think what companies
need to do is learn what are the best practices to
change my workflows with AI, and again, the sooner
you get battle scars on that, the better. So,
you put all that together, and that's why you end
up with two or three years. Now let's take that
and apply it to sales.
Thomas: 38:35
The challenge with sales, the last book we wrote
it was called Digital Hesitation. We had a chapter
called Data-Driven Sales, and our argument was
that sales organizations need to wake up every
morning and do exactly what you just said, which
is I'm a salesperson, I look at my screen and
the data should be my guide in terms of who I call
and what I sell to them. The data analytics should
be my guide, and that data should be getting
better and better. The analytics is getting
better and better.
Thomas: 39:03
The problem that we see in the industry is that's
not how sales organizations want to operate.
That's just not their DNA. They're not data driven
historically. They get up and they say, well,
look, I'm going to call, you know, to call Craig,
because I was talking to him last week and I
really think he's ready to buy this, and so that's
my gut and he was giving me all the right signals,
right? Well, the data says Craig is like way early
in the sales cycle and you should be talking to
Susie over here because she is really ready.
Well, I'll get to Susie next week, and so that
is a huge shift in mentality. But it's going to
come because the tools, you know, like the tool
you were describing, I'm not familiar with that
one, but I'm familiar with other ones. There's,
there there, right, they're getting really good.
We just had to get the change management piece
of it, that last leg, that last mile, to
get workers to be adept with these tools.
Craig: 40:01
Yeah, and the other
question was— so two years, two, three years,
and that's getting shorter. But it's an ongoing
process because in each of these categories there
are new products coming out or new features to
products that may be you passed over because
the one you settled on had features, but maybe
that product now surpasses the one you settled on
because its features are better. I mean, do you
have, do you advise people to have someone who's
sort of on this continuous learning treadmill?
Thomas: 40:42
Yeah, I mean, you know,
the concept of agile, right with development
and just the fact that you are constantly,
it's not the old waterfall days where it's like,
we have a project, boom, boom, boom, bam, we're
done. We're probably, don't have to go look at
that for however many you know quarters or years
or whatever, because we did that. It's going to be
this never-ending opportunity for optimization.
Thomas: 41:06
I think that that is going to be the reality,
my hope and I don't know if this is going to be
true and I test in these case studies as people
are rolling out technologies but I would assert
that historically, enterprise software has been
very complex and very onerous to implement and
to get your business value from. That's just a
reality and we've had in play for decades now. But
if you're a company, and B2C, it's a lot easier,
but B2B is still oh my God, I got to buy this
tool, I got to build this configuration, and so
it's expensive, time consuming to get the business
value. I am hoping, with this next generation of
AI enabled capabilities, that they're going
to be actually easier to implement and adopt,
and that's TBD. We don't know yet, but I think
it's going to make a faster life cycle there.
I can get tools. I can get a new feature. Once
I get good at this and leveraging these kinds
of capabilities, I can do it faster than I
used to in the old world. But we'll see.
Craig: 42:13
I'm interested in
what's happening with AI agents, both virtual
and embodied because there's just, even in the
last month, a ton of new research coming out
of DeepMind or Amazon, different people. Is
that something that because again, that's going
to change the game altogether from just simply
GenAI tools? Are you guys trying to stay on top
of that, or how do you advise your members?
Thomas: 42:53
Yeah so, what's interesting
with agents and you know, the two use cases there
well, there's multiple, but I mean two classic for
a tech company would be the support I've got a
technical issue, I have an agent there to help
me or customer success, I'm trying to do something
I haven't done before with your technology, can I
have an intelligent agent there to help? It's
interesting because, again, these case studies
that I'm looking at right now and I have not done
a deep dive on agents and how they're changing;
the earlier generation of this was sort of
these classic chatbots and stuff which helped
in certain scenarios but in general were probably
not very satisfactory for the end user, right? So,
this is definitely changing that game and saying,
look, this is going to be way more intelligent.
Thomas: 43:38
What I'm seeing is sort of the middle ground,
is this co-pilot approach, where companies
are again building co-pilots that are specific
to their products, their world, tuned to that
language, and building these co-pilots initially
internally to help their own technical engineers
solve things much faster, and then they're saying,
well, wait a minute, let's let our end customers
have access to that and basically augment their
ability to completely self-serve. So that is
already a winning play for sure, and I've done
several case studies on that. And then the
agents, I think, is the next version of that.
Thomas: 44:19
So, it's really
interesting that that term has sort of been
you know, people have grabbed onto that term
to describe the experience of saying I've got a
co-pilot that is going to ride alongside you and
help you do whatever it is. And so, again, Nokia
has put a lot into this for telecom engineers,
specifically tuned to those use cases and
starting with their internal engineers,
and now it's out there for their customers to
leverage as well and you know, again, it can be
a game changer for the productivity of both sides
of that right, for their own engineers and for
their customers. So, there's definitely, that's
already, you know a proven use case for sure.
Craig: 45:00
Yeah, well, agents
I'm really really excited about, because some
of the stuff that's coming out of OpenAI and—
Thomas: 45:08
Well, it's mind-boggling,
mind-boggling what it could potentially
be doing for us, I mean, it really is.
Craig: 45:12
You know you mentioned when
I was saying what's the sort of timeframe for
implementing, that companies, when they first
address automating with AI some part of their
business, that they've got to centralize the data,
they've got to rationalize the data. Does that
have to be done for every separate use case or
is that something that companies need to be doing
right now, understanding that data is going to
drive their business regardless of the business
they're in? So they need to centralize the data,
rationalize the data, clean the data, regardless
of how it's going to be used at this point?
Thomas: 45:57
Yeah, no, this is a great topic and the one thing
I'll tell your listeners, because I'm sure you
have people from a lot of different backgrounds,
industries, and you think of technology companies
that sell technology to help people manage their
data and you say, gosh, those folks have to have
the best, their data house has got to be in order,
and it's just, it's not true. They’re as messed up
as everybody else is on this topic and you know,
it's just, it's the reality. So, everybody has
this problem and what drives it is sort of these
organizational fiefdoms, right. So, sales wants
their data, marketing wants their data, service
people want their data, and so everyone's got
their version of the truth, et cetera, and it has
created all these silos. And now these AI tools
come along, and you say, well, look, to really get
the bang for the buck, I need a holistic view of
what the heck my customer's doing. I can't just be
like; I only have the sales view of it.
Thomas: 46:53
So, it's forcing this issue where people have to
say there's really one source of truth, one gold
standard. And so that pressure is there now and
there is going to be a lot of work that has to
be done to break these silos down. The winning
move that we see when we test on practices, and
this is about 47% of the companies that we survey
now, they have a centralized data analytics team.
That is the first step. So before you even crush,
get everything together in one lake or whatever
you're doing there is, you basically say, look,
we're going to have a team. They own the source
of truth and in the short term they're going to
be having to deal with a lot of different silos
to bring in what is going on with the customer or
whatever's going on with the product but that we
all agree that we go to them and that if the data
is not right there, we keep pushing on that until
they've got the right view of the of the world.
And then, behind the scenes, we're cleaning up the
data. We're starting to break down the physical
silos, if you will, between organizations or
applications or whatever.
Thomas: 47:56
So, I think that's the journey. But to get a
team that owns again the source of truth for
the company on the data, I think is a winning move
to start that journey. But what you're pushing on,
it's got to happen because you can't get these
tools to really sing, to get the full potential
from the AI if your data is the classic garbage
in, garbage out. That's more true than ever.
Craig: 48:20
Right, but that's
a process that can start long before you
decide what tool you're going to settle on?
Thomas: 48:27
Yeah, absolutely.
Craig: 48:28
So that would
be kind of a first step in everything.
Thomas: 48:31
Yeah, absolutely. And just think about
that culturally. So that this really lands with
the audience, right? What are we saying here? Oh,
yeah, well, we have an analytics team. We have
an analytics team. Okay, that's fine, but what
I'm saying is okay, I'm in sales and what I am now
agreeing to is that that team, that central team,
owns the source of truth of what's going on with
sales, that my data feeds into there and they say
look, this is what's going on with forecast,
or pipeline, or whatever, close rates. And I
am seeding that ground. I'm not holding my data
and source of truth and everything here. That,
culturally, you can start to force that issue
before you solve all the technical issues.
Craig: 49:12
And on that point, but across the board, and
you know, to the point of evaluating and adopting
tools on something like data management, that's
a specialization like the Wealth of Nations.
Shouldn’t a company be just an orchestrator and
all of the stuff you want to centralize, clean
your data? You bring in a specialized company
to do that. Not that you don't have somebody on
your team writing herd and understanding what's
going on, if it's optimizing sales. Rather
than have your team trying to figure out,
you bring in an expert who can say you know, I see
the problem, this is what you should be doing.
Thomas: 50:05
Yeah, I mean, it's a great question. You know the
classic, am I going to try to build this myself or
buy the expertise? I mean I don't have strong data
or point of view on that. I will say that, you
know, in general, I think there's tons of awesome
expertise that's out there that can help you on
that journey. I don't think there's any doubt
about that and there's, technology is going to
help you on that journey. And I think that, again,
what I'll just emphasize is two things on that
and what you started with, you know the concept
that you need more centralized data, et cetera.
It is another one of these internalizations that
companies and executive teams have to have the
wherewithal to execute. So, they're saying gosh,
if we're going to leverage this AI in our
workflows, we got to get our data house in
order. So that means that we have to be committed,
probably ultimately, to centralizing, which means
we may need expertise. We got to invest in this
and culturally, we are all going to have to agree
that we don't have our own sources of truth.
Thomas: 51:06
And that second one, I'm telling you,
is harder, probably, than the first one,
even though everyone's focused on the first
one. It's a technical problem. It's both,
cultural and technical. You know, is there
a lot of hype on AI? Absolutely, but it is
already impacting business models. This is not a
mañana wait, and I'll just give you a data point.
I was doing some research on headcount analysis.
There was an article in the Wall Street Journal
around the fact that AI is already starting to eat
through headcount. And there's no doubt, and I'll
give you an example, if you look at Microsoft,
Amazon, Salesforce, these are all companies that
have more revenue under management than they did
two years ago and they all have less employees,
and that is not an anomaly.
Craig: 51:57
AI might be the most important new computer
technology ever. It's storming every industry
and literally billions of dollars are being
invested, so buckle up. The problem is that
AI needs a lot of speed and processing power.
So how do you compete without costs spiraling
out of control? It's time to upgrade to
the next generation of the cloud Oracle
Cloud Infrastructure, or OCI. OCI is a single
platform for your infrastructure, database,
application development, and AI needs. OCI has
four to eight times the bandwidth of other clouds,
offers one consistent price instead of variable
regional pricing. And, of course, nobody does data
better than Oracle. So now you can train your AI
models at twice the speed and less than half the
cost of other clouds. If you want to do more and
spend less, like Uber, 8x8, and Databricks Mosaic,
take a free test drive of OCI at oraclecom/eyeonat
that's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I all run together.
That's it for today's episode. I want to
thank Thomas for his time. If you want
to read a transcript of today's conversation,
you can find one on our website at eye-on.ai.
Remember the singularity may not be near, but AI
is fast changing our worlds, so pay attention.